
https://mtadata3101.github.io/.github/

Learning Objectives:
-Principles and goals of reproducible, ethical, open, data
-use Git for reproducible version control
-Iteration of Data Flows

Approaches to Assessment?
Engagement?
Participatory Live Coding?
Formative Assessments (after Carpentries...)
How to assign grades
  Send Elizabeth Ungrading

Delivery Modalities:
-all classes joint in person?
-all classes separate?
-live online synchronous?
-record asynchronously; cannot post recordings on GitHub
-hybrid?
  Online fall back position in case of pandemic resurgence?
  Doug aiming to be on Campus Tues-Thurs through fall; some nights or weeks 'off' would be helpful

-What technology(s) needed to support above options?
  Do we go live in person with asynchronous recording backup?
  Live online with asynchronous recording backup?
    Easier for computer set up for Elizabeth & Doug
    Technical troubles & installation visit in person with computer...
      Elizabeth can count bookable appt. hours towards Library Reference Interaction
      Set up first week in person
      
      Then move largely online?
      Use break out rooms for catch up/set up
      Teams is supported by IT
      
 
 'Install Week' book appt. for set up & verification     
  Actual hybrid is difficult
  
  
Possible Structures:
-multi-week student led projects leading to presentations?
  Advantage: self-directed
  Disadvantage: ?

-Elizabeth seminars + discussion on topics series?
  Coordinate with course coverage?
  
  Start with Research Data Life Cycle; start at the end; find & reuse data...
    What resources are accessible?
    Workshop on Accessing Stats Can data...
    Vett Lloyd Lyme Disease data set published
    Data entry errors useful to see...
    Use 2 Canadian sample data sets
    Then each student find data set of interest to them
    Work through Research Data Management questions;  `
      -ex. was data set well documented
      Could work well on GitHub
      
  Overview of Research Data Management
  Types, Formats, and Stages of Data
  Making Data Meaningful to Others
  Data Storage, Backup, and Security
  Ethical Considerations for Data Sharing and Re-Use
  Archiving and Preservation of Data

Project and/or Live coding exercises of:

Week I:
 'Install Week' book appt. for set up & verification     
 How to motivate GitHub for the rest...
 Git(Hub) for open science
 Git(Hub) for version control
 Transferrable Skill...
 
 Data Nudism: What do You Have to Hide?
 
1) Set up R, Git, GitHub, RStudio(.cloud?)
  https://happygitwithr.com/
  https://rfortherestofus.com/2021/02/how-to-use-git-github-with-r/

Week II:

https://openrefine.org/
  Lyme Data
  Mesoscale data, interactive tidying...
  Export script as json file for rerun with same column headings
  
Week III:
  Now, fully scripted data handling for reproducibility and documentation...
  
  R for Data Science Chapters 1-3
  https://r4ds.had.co.nz/
  Why Open Data?
  Why Tidy Data?

Week III

Think of reminding people of Python chunks where suitable

Data Types, Workflow, and Data Transformation (R for Data Science Chapters 4-8)

3) MetaData and File Structuring...
  Case Studies in Coordinating data from multiple sources using file naming, directory naming and meta-data catalog
  
4) Data Wrangling (Chapters 11, 12, 14-16)
    Iteration of Data Flows (Chapters 17-19)
    Iteration of Data Flows (Chapters 20-21)  

5) Open Data Repositories...
Dryad
Pangaea
...

Project FrameWorks:

5) Importing, assembling and managing instrumental data
    Encoding issues from older instrumentation
    Interactive import (.Rmd) vs. fully scripted (.R)
   
6) Importing and using geographic data using the GoogleEarth platform
https://github.com/r-spatial/rgee

7) Webscraping through API and custom scripting
https://doi.org/10.1080/10691898.2020.1787116
    Case study: Environment Canada weather data
    Case study: DataStream data
    
8) BioInformatics
https://www.bioconductor.org/
SnakeMake
EggNog

CapStone
7) Interactive Data Exploration with Shiny
Transferrable skill
OR Python equivalent...

Consult with Matt Betti on Capstone?
    

Calendar Syllabus
Data 3101 Mount Allison University  
Data Acquisition and Organization

Prereq: MATH 1311; or permission of the Program Advisor.
This course will build on MATH 1311 to cover high throughput acquisition and management of data.  
The course will use diverse data types and formats to illustrate conceptual challenges across disciplines.  
Technical aspects will include evolving approaches to script-based web scraping, file formats and conversions, data mergers and tidying, meta-data organization and capture.  
In parallel, the course will cover theoretical and ethical aspects of data curation and access policies, development of best practices for research data management and case studies in secure management of sensitive or private data.
(Format: Integrated Lecture and Laboratory 6 hours)

2019 Overview

Science 3991: Operational Data Science
Here are our weekly topics:
May 6-13
Overview of Research Data Management
Setup and Data Visualization (Chapters 1-3)

May 13-17
Types, Formats, and Stages of Data
Data Types, Workflow, and Data Transformation (Chapters 4-8)

May 20-24
Making Data Meaningful to Others
Data Wrangling (Chapters 11, 12, 14-16)

May 27-31
Data Storage, Backup, and Security
Programming and Iteration of Data Flows (Chapters 17-19)

June 3-7
Ethical Considerations for Data Sharing and Re-Use
Programming and Iteration of Data Flows (Chapters 20-21)

June 10-14
Archiving and Preservation of Data
Dimensional Reduction and Correlational Analyses
Communication: RNotebooks, RMarkdown (Chapters 26-30)

June 17-21
Catch-up and Final Projects
